[Music]
spider silk with the scent of a female
he just needs to follow it wherever it
leads him
[Music]
other males have gone on the same quest
and have come to a grisly end
[Music]
here's the female and she doesn't look
very amorous
in fact she kills every male who doesn't
match up to her expectations what can he
do to win her over
[Music]
dance dance for his life he will need a
show-stopping trick to avoid becoming
lunch
[Music]
with his fan unfurled he begins an ever
more complicated series of dance moves
to try and seduce her
[Music]
the
at last she succumbs to his advances and
allows him to mate with her
[Music]
he matched her expectations but she
kills him anyway the Namib Desert one of
the most exposed places on earth
[Music]
as the Sun climbs high everybody takes
cover from the extreme heat everybody
except the hot rod and as others take
refuge their day is just beginning
cleaning out the nest the Sun can reach
a scorching 70 centigrade the ants long
legs raise their bodies above the
surface where it's 10 degrees cooler but
if they stand still they will fry
they must keep moving or risk the same
fate as their quarry the creatures that
have collapsed from heatstroke too
deeply buried but it would place to cool
off foraging decisions must be fast to
be perfect back to the nest before they
also died but they strayed into a
minefield
[Music]
each of these strange tone shaped pits
is a deathtrap with a brutal predator at
its center here live antlion larva tiny
ambush predators with venom filled
pincers
[Music]
some ants managed to escape but the
antlion has other tricks flinging sand
into the air it creates an avalanche
in this cone of death the walls are so
angled that the sand slips beneath the
ants feet as boulders rain from the sky
escape seems almost impossible
[Music]
few northern Australia has the highest
tides in the tropics which expose vast
areas of shoreline and here lives a
truly extraordinary species of octopus
[Music]
octopuses are marine animals they live
and breathe underwater at low tide most
octopuses will be imprisoned in their
rocky booze
[Music]
but this is no ordinary octopus
[Applause]
[Music]
it's the only one especially adapted to
walk on land it pulls itself along using
the hundreds of tiny suckers that line
its arms hunting for crabs it walks from
pool to pool
[Music]
a potful rather startled fish this one
is empty
so the octopus moves on
a rough fool may seem like a safe refuge
but the octopus's suckers enable it to
move just as stealthily in water as out
of it
[Music]
nowhere is safe when this octopus is
around in Papua New Guinea the bowerbird
has lovingly rebuilt and redecorated his
bowel
another visitor this time it's a female
this is just where he wants her time to
begin the show first he expands his
pupils alternately
[Music]
it's an oddly mesmerizing display
a spot of limbering up accompanied by a
weird and wheezy call from deep in his
throat now it's time for his grand
performance he waves his wing like a
Matadors cape she appears to be
transfixed this is certainly eye
catching but it seems he needs to do
more generously she drops him a hint
it's the bird equivalent of a bouquet of
flowers
[Laughter]
it's all going so well it's time to get
physical with a few head butts to her
chest one final flourish to cap weeks of
effort but something's wrong his rival
is back and at the worst possible moment
what should he do
[Applause]
for the female the moment has gone
sometimes whatever you do things just
don't work out while our brains get
swamped with information about patterns
and color through Callie's eyes fast
movement trumps everything
[Music]
as she stalks the flies her eyes send
signals to the brains visual cortex
which analyzes what's changed between
one picture and the next up to 70 times
every second
faster than the human brain
[Music]
and a far bigger proportion of the
neurons in Callie's brain are dedicated
purely to the detection of movement
she almost can't help but pants
cats wild ancestors relied on low-light
vision and the ability to detect
movement to stalk prey but these
evolutionary adaptations have a downside
cats can't focus on anything closer than
around 30 centimeters in front of them
but where their eyes fail them cats have
another perfectly adapted sense to go in
for the kill
the team has set up an experiment to
reveal just how our cat's secret weapon
works so the camera can do in full HD
resolution up to 2,700 frames per second
I was thought 2030 times we'll get it
John Bradshaw is hoping these ultra-high
speed cameras will capture this
extraordinary sensory organ in action it
really is very very quick I've seen
still photographs of it happening but
there's nothing like actually seeing the
whole motion so I think we got it there
but it's very very very quick John's
trying to observe the cat's whiskers as
they move forward into the attack
position let's just take the toy away
for a second and that's can we ever look
at what we've just taken okay so here we
go the cat realizes the masses within
his grass but he wants to know exactly
where it is in relation to his mass its
eyes give up because they can't focus
very close that's where the whiskers
take over
so what we can see here is the whiskers
suddenly being swept forward and now the
claws are coming into action so we got
here look the whiskers are pointing
almost directly in front of the cat's
nose it finally is catching them with
his claws as he sweeps around trying to
catch the mouse but the little muscles
at the base of each whisker are really
tugging hard to swing those forward
completely out of the normal position is
this really extraordinarily detailed
I've never expected to see all of this
it's all seems to take place in about a
fifth of a second which just shows how
fast cats reflexes really are from the
point where they sweep the whiskers
forward with the muscles contract and
then relax back and the whiskers spring
back again the mass doesn't have a
chance far thicker and longer than
normal hares whiskers also sit three
times deeper in the skin where they
attach to nerve endings telling the cat
how far each one is being bent back and
how quickly their whiskers are the same
width as their body allowing cats to
navigate the narrowest spaces
you
cats also have whiskers above their eyes
and on their ankles sending them a
constant stream of information as they
sense the world around them there will
be no easy meals on this island walruses
are the largest seals in the world they
weigh over a ton and are armed with
tusks a metre long
[Music]
exhausted from his shrim the bear must
regain his strength
the next day a sea fog shrouds the
island the wallace's sense that they're
in danger
using the fog as cover the bear
approaches the herd the adults close
ranks around their young presenting a
wall of blubber and high he tests the
man but it stands firmly it appears that
the world's largest land carnivore has
met his match
[Music]
there must be a in the armor
somewhere
[Music]
here
this female walrus is shielding her
puppy if he can just prise her off
[Music]
the bear's claws and teeth can't
penetrate her thick hide
[Music]
with the herd retreating to water the
bear must move quickly
[Music]
having failed with one he heads straight
for another
[Music]
the chance of his first meal in months
is slipping away
[Music]
he seems increasingly desperate
it's now or never he must avoid the
stabbing tusks if he's the win
[Music]
the flailing walrus is immensely
powerful and drags the bear away from
the shallows towards the safety of the
herd
[Music]
it slips from his grasp at this time of
year polar bears on average succeed only
once in 20 hunts
if the hunter is skinny like this one
that may not be often enough
all she can do is keep trying
[Music]
to prevent her scent betraying her she
makes a wide sweep to get downwind of
the seal
getting tous
she's now right behind the seal
[Applause]
incredibly she caught the seals
underwater it's only small but even so
it's blubber alone will contain a
hundred thousand calories enough to
sustain the spare for a week
[Music]
and in that time she might even catch
another
[Music]
but this can't go on forever as summer
continues temperatures are rising each
hunt requires more energy draining the
bears of their reserves wolves these in
northern Canada are the largest and most
powerful in the world and they're
setting out land
[Music]
the pack is 25 strong a sign that the
prey they're seeking is formidable
[Music]
these bison are even bigger than their
southern cousins and the largest land
animals in North America for generations
wolves and bison here have been shaped
by their battles with each other making
each the most impressive of its kind the
Bison will not stay long among the trees
they're not safe here the wolves are
closing in but their chance of ambushing
the Bison in the woods has passed their
prey are now in the open and grouped
together for safety
the wounds will need to work as a team
with their to make a kill
they circle the herd try to unsettle it
and spit it up but the Bison are armed
and dangerous they will be safe as long
as they stick together the Wolves up
their game hurrying the herd a ploy to
trigger a stampede and spit away one of
the smaller ones
the Bison form a defensive circle around
their young horns pointing outwards
[Music]
the Wolves need a bison to break rank
but the tables are turning and now the
wolves have to retreat
[Music]
the back focus their attention on the
rear of the herd and the Bison begin to
panic
[Music]
a young bison falls behind
even this yearling Dwarfs the words
[Music]
running head down the Hertz only thought
is escape
[Music]
a stroke of luck for the Wolves
the kill will feed the pack for several
days but then they will have to resume
the chase that the frozen ends of our
planet the struggle for survival
never eases it's called Darwin's bark
spider and the female has a remarkable
strategy
[Music]
like a real-life Spider Woman she sprays
strands of silk they one long continuous
flow the threads fan out like a sail and
drift on air currents blowing across the
water every few seconds she crimps the
strands together to stop them spreading
too widely the breeze will do the rest
blowing the threads into a single line
and a 25 meter bridge now she must
reinforce her bridge because her web
will hang from it
[Music]
but there's something bouncing the line
at the other end
another Darwin spider is trying to take
advantage of her hard work
[Music]
she must deal with the intruder head on
the cut line is an inconvenience but no
more than that with hopes on the tips of
each leg she gathers in the thread
[Music]
it won't go to waste as he'll eat it
later when it's all reeled in she sprays
again out streams another 25 meter
bridging line how a spider no bigger
than a thumbnail can produce so much
silk so quickly has baffled scientists
and it's no ordinary silk it's the
toughest natural fiber on the planet
tougher than steel and it needs to be
tough to span the wide river
with the bridge taught and the ground
anchor in place it's time to construct
her trap
[Music]
these spiders can build the world's
largest orb webs up to 2 metres wide a
[Music]
few hours from the first spray of
bridging line the job is done
[Music]
now her strategy is simple sit and wait
and there's one final bout of silk
production shrink-wrapping her food for
later it's early morning
and ticker spots a strange black cat on
a nearby roof and listen to this
chittering may simply be a sound of
frustration but no one's really sure
rocky out for a stroll in the afternoon
[Music]
makes this noise when another cat blocks
his way
but the story of cat communication is a
lot more surprising than this there's
one noise we've hardly heard it rarely
happens when the cats are out with each
other to understand what's going on we
have to go back to the beginning and the
youngest members of the study
biologists dr. John Bradshaw can explain
why these 1 week old kittens meow
the meow starts off as a kitten
vocalization it's something that kittens
use in order to call their mothers over
and and as you can see it's very
effective in doing that the mother is
very attentive to those meows and then
as the kitten grows up it gradually
stops meowing presumably just because
the meows stops working the mother wants
to wean the kitten and stops responding
with a pet cat which is constantly
meowing at its owner it's a way of
getting the owner's attention that's
because we are not very vigilant
creatures we spend a lot of our time
with our noses buried in books or
computer screens or TVs and the cat each
cat learns independently we think that
using this piece of kitten behavior is a
good way of getting our attention so
meowing is a good we're getting to look
up and find out what it is they want
from us there you go Henry so cats have
two different languages one for each
other and one for us
[Music]
scientists have found cats make a huge
range of meows and they wondered if
there was a universal cat human language
there's a troll that was quite yeah
that's it they make that funny little
noise ago scientists have discovered
that every cats meows are unique each
cat learns which noises work best in
certain situations developing a special
language that only their owner will
understand when they want food it's a
much more prolonged meow hungry Oh Miss
Piggy's learned how to say milk so she
doesn't prefer milk meow meow yeah what
is it nice and when are cats meow
there's one thing that almost every
owner in the study said they did did you
go hunting today talk back good to go
you're pretty cool
your mama's pretty go big see you lovely
girl yeah talking comes naturally to us
and every kitten that spends time with
people learns that to communicate with
us they have to make a noise